Upper respiratory symptoms from flu
and colds can be very uncomfortable.
The most common cause of colds and flu
is the rhinovirus, which lives in nasal passages.
It enters through the nostrils and
passes to the back of the nose,
where it invades cells lining the upper area of the throat.
Runny nose and sinus congestion are
responses to a rhinovirus invasion.
Nasal drainage increases
as your body tries to get rid of the virus.
Inflammation and increased blood flow
to sinonasal tissues cause sinus congestion.
Saline irrigation can help to relieve
these symptoms in multiple ways.
It cleans mucus from your nose,
which can also help make nasally
administered medications more effective.
Other benefits include reducing swelling;
increasing airflow;
removing bacteria and viruses from your nose;
and decreasing production of proteins
associated with inflammation.
Saline irrigation also moistens
tiny hair like structures called cilia,
helping them pass bacteria and viruses to the throat
to be swallowed without causing harm.